Searching Algorithms

Searching is the fundamental process of locating a specific element or item within a collection of data. This collection of data can take various forms, such as arrays, lists, trees, or other structured representations.

Basic Searching Algorithms:
Linear Search – O(n) Time and O(1) Space
It is the simplest searching algorithm that checks each element sequentially until the key is found or the collection is fully traversed. Works on both sorted and unsorted data.

It is used for an unsorted array. It mainly does one by one comparison of the item to be search with array elements. It takes linear or O(n) Time.

Binary Search – O(log n) Time and O(1) Space
It works on sorted arrays by repeatedly dividing the search interval in half. If the target matches the middle element, return it; otherwise, continue searching left or right.

It is used for a sorted array. It mainly compares the array's middle element first and if the middle element is same as input, then it returns. Otherwise it searches in either left half or right half based on comparison result (Whether the mid element is smaller or greater). This algorithm is faster than linear search and takes O(Log n) time.

Ternary Search – O(log₃ n) Time and O(1) Space
Ternary Search is a variant of binary search that splits the search interval into three parts instead of two. Mostly used in searching unimodal functions.

And there a lot of different searching algorithms.

Conditions to apply Binary Search Algorithm in a Data Structure
The data structure must be sorted.
Access to any element of the data structure should take constant time.
Binary Search Algorithm
Divide the search space into two halves by finding the middle index "mid". 
Compare the middle of the search space with the key. 
If the key is found at middle, the process is terminated.
If the key is not found at middle, choose which half will be used as the next search space.
-> If the key is smaller than the middle, then the left side is used for next search.
-> If the key is larger than the middle, then the right side is used for next search.
This process is continued until the key is found or the total search space is exhausted.





